GETTING_STARTED.md, before:

# Getting Started with AssetSim Pro

**Quick Start Guide for New Developers**

This guide provides the essential steps to get AssetSim Pro running locally or deploying to Azure. Follow this path to avoid reading hundreds of pages of documentation upfront.

## 📋 Table of Contents

1. [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
2. [Local Development Setup](#local-development-setup)
3. [Azure Deployment Path](#azure-deployment-path)
4. [Next Steps](#next-steps)
5. [Common Issues](#common-issues)

---

## Prerequisites

Before starting, ensure you have:

### For Local Development

- **Node.js 20.x** or higher
- **Docker & Docker Compose** (for local services)
- **Git**
- **npm** package manager

### For Azure Deployment

All of the above, plus:

- **Azure Subscription** with Contributor or Owner role
- **Azure CLI 2.50.0+** installed and configured
- **Microsoft Entra ID Global Administrator** role (for API consent only)
- **Terraform 1.5.0+** (for infrastructure deployment)

---

## Local Development Setup

For local development without Azure, follow these steps:

### Step 1: Clone and Install Dependencies

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/archubbuck/asset-sim-pro.git
cd asset-sim-pro

# Install dependencies
npm install
```

This automatically sets up Husky git hooks for commit message validation.

### Step 2: Start Local Services

```bash
# Start Docker services (SQL Server, Redis, Azurite, SignalR emulator)
docker compose up -d

# Verify services are running
docker compose ps
```

### Step 3: Initialize and Seed Database

```bash
# Create database schema
npm run db:init

# Seed with demo data (optional but recommended)
npm run seed:local
```

### Step 4: Configure Local Environment

```bash
# Copy environment template
cp .env.local.example .env.local

# Edit .env.local and set your Kendo UI license key
# KENDO_UI_LICENSE=your-kendo-license-key-here

# Review and adjust connection strings if needed
# (Default values work with Docker Compose setup)
```

**Important: Kendo UI License Configuration**

AssetSim Pro uses Kendo UI for financial charts and components. To run without trial watermarks:

1. Obtain your Kendo UI license key from [https://www.telerik.com/account/](https://www.telerik.com/account/)
2. Open `.env.local` and set `KENDO_UI_LICENSE=your-license-key`
3. Never commit `.env.local` to version control (it's already in `.gitignore`)

If you don't have a license yet, the application will run in trial mode with watermarks.

### Step 5: Start Development Servers

```bash
# Terminal 1: Start Angular dev server
npm start

# Terminal 2: Start Azure Functions backend (in a new terminal)
cd apps/backend
npm install
cp local.settings.json.example local.settings.json
npm start
```

### ✅ Verify Local Setup

- **Frontend:** http://localhost:4200
- **Backend API:** http://localhost:7071/api
- **API Documentation:** http://localhost:7071/api/docs

**📖 Next:** See [Local Development Guide](./README.md#local-development-environment) for detailed Docker service configuration.

---

## Azure Deployment Path

To deploy AssetSim Pro to Azure, follow this **sequential path**:

### Path Overview

```
1. Bootstrap (One-Time Setup)
   ↓
2. Infrastructure Deployment
   ↓
3. Backend Configuration
   ↓
4. Frontend Deployment
   ↓
5. Verification
```

### Step 1: Bootstrap Azure Resources

**⚠️ REQUIRED BEFORE DEPLOYMENT:** Complete bootstrap operations to set up foundational infrastructure.

#### Configure Secrets

Before deploying, configure the following secrets:

**For GitHub Actions CI/CD:**
1. Go to your GitHub repository → Settings → Secrets and variables → Actions
2. Add a new repository secret:
   - Name: `KENDO_UI_LICENSE`
   - Value: Your Kendo UI license key from https://www.telerik.com/account/

**For Azure DevOps:**
1. In your Azure DevOps project, go to Pipelines → Library
2. Add `KENDO_UI_LICENSE` to the `assetsim-prod-vars` variable group
3. Mark it as secret to protect the value

These secrets are used during the build process to embed the Kendo UI license key without exposing it in source control.

#### Option A: Automated Bootstrap (Recommended)

```bash
# 1. Create Terraform state storage
./scripts/bootstrap-terraform-state.sh

# 2. Grant Entra ID API permissions (requires Global Admin)
export APP_ID="your-application-client-id"
./scripts/bootstrap-entra-consent.sh
```

**📖 See:** [scripts/README.md](./scripts/README.md) for detailed automation documentation.

#### Option B: Manual Bootstrap

Follow the comprehensive manual steps in [BOOTSTRAP_GUIDE.md](./docs/deployment/BOOTSTRAP_GUIDE.md), which covers:

- Phase 1: Terraform State Storage
- Phase 2: Entra ID API Consent
- Phase 3: Azure DevOps Self-Hosted Agent Pool

**📖 See:** [BOOTSTRAP_GUIDE.md](./docs/deployment/BOOTSTRAP_GUIDE.md) for step-by-step manual instructions.

### Step 2: Deploy Infrastructure with Terraform

After bootstrap is complete:

```bash
# Navigate to Terraform directory
cd terraform

# Initialize Terraform with remote state
terraform init \
  -backend-config="resource_group_name=rg-tfstate" \
  -backend-config="storage_account_name=<your-storage-account>" \
  -backend-config="container_name=tfstate"

# Review deployment plan
terraform plan

# Deploy infrastructure
terraform apply
```

**📖 See:** [DEPLOYMENT_GUIDE.md](./docs/deployment/DEPLOYMENT_GUIDE.md) for complete deployment instructions.

### Step 3: Configure Backend

```bash
# Deploy Azure Functions
cd apps/backend
func azure functionapp publish <your-function-app-name>

# Configure application settings (Entra ID, connection strings)
az functionapp config appsettings set \
  --name <your-function-app-name> \
  --resource-group <your-resource-group> \
  --settings @appsettings.json
```

**📖 See:** [DEPLOYMENT_GUIDE.md - Phase 4](./docs/deployment/DEPLOYMENT_GUIDE.md#phase-4-deploy-backend-function-app) for detailed backend configuration.

### Step 4: Deploy Frontend

```bash
# Build and deploy Static Web App
npm run build:prod
swa deploy ./dist/apps/client \
  --deployment-token $DEPLOYMENT_TOKEN
```

**📖 See:** [DEPLOYMENT_GUIDE.md - Phase 5](./docs/deployment/DEPLOYMENT_GUIDE.md#phase-5-configure-static-web-app) for Static Web App setup.

### Step 5: Verify Deployment

Run the verification checklist:

```bash
# Verify infrastructure
terraform output

# Test backend health
curl https://<your-function-app>.azurewebsites.net/api/health

# Test frontend
curl https://<your-static-web-app>.azurestaticapps.net
```

**📖 See:** [VERIFICATION.md](./docs/architecture/VERIFICATION.md) for complete verification steps.

---

## Next Steps

### After Local Setup

- **Explore the codebase:** [NX_WORKSPACE_GUIDE.md](./docs/development/NX_WORKSPACE_GUIDE.md)
- **Understand architecture:** [ARCHITECTURE.md](./ARCHITECTURE.md)
- **Review testing strategy:** [TESTING.md](./docs/development/TESTING.md)
- **Contribution guidelines:** [CONTRIBUTING.md](./CONTRIBUTING.md)

### After Azure Deployment

- **Configure monitoring:** Set up Application Insights
- **Review security:** [ZERO_TRUST_IMPLEMENTATION.md](./docs/architecture/ZERO_TRUST_IMPLEMENTATION.md)
- **Set up CI/CD:** Review [azure-pipelines.yml](./azure-pipelines.yml)

### Understanding the Project

- **Architecture decisions:** [ARCHITECTURE.md](./ARCHITECTURE.md) contains all ADRs
- **Backend-frontend integration:** [BACKEND_FRONTEND_INTEGRATION.md](./docs/architecture/BACKEND_FRONTEND_INTEGRATION.md)

---

## Common Issues

### Issue: "Docker services not starting"

**Solution:**

```bash
# Check Docker is running
docker ps

# View logs for troubleshooting
docker compose logs

# Reset services
docker compose down -v
docker compose up -d
```

### Issue: "Commit message rejected"

**Cause:** This project uses [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/)

**Solution:**

```bash
# Valid format: type(scope): description
git commit -m "feat(backend): add new feature"
git commit -m "fix(frontend): resolve bug"
```

**📖 See:** [CONTRIBUTING.md](./CONTRIBUTING.md) for commit message guidelines.

### Issue: "Azure authentication failed"

**Solution:**

```bash
# Login to Azure
az login

# Set correct subscription
az account set --subscription "<your-subscription-id>"

# Verify login
az account show
```

### Issue: "Terraform backend not found"

**Cause:** Bootstrap not completed

**Solution:** Complete [Step 1: Bootstrap Azure Resources](#step-1-bootstrap-azure-resources) first.

### Issue: "npm install fails"

**Solution:**

```bash
# Clear npm cache
npm cache clean --force

# Delete node_modules and lockfile
rm -rf node_modules package-lock.json

# Reinstall
npm install
```

---

## Document Navigation

This is your **starting point**. Here's how the documentation is organized:

### 📚 Complete Documentation Index

For comprehensive documentation navigation, visit the **[Documentation Hub (`docs/README.md`)](./docs/README.md)**

### Quick Navigation

```
GETTING_STARTED.md (you are here) ← Start here for quick setup
├── docs/README.md ← Complete documentation hub and index
├── README.md ← Project overview and workspace structure
├── Local Development Path
│   ├── docs/development/NX_WORKSPACE_GUIDE.md ← Nx monorepo development
│   ├── docs/development/TESTING.md ← Testing strategy
│   └── CONTRIBUTING.md ← Git workflow and standards
└── Azure Deployment Path
    ├── docs/deployment/BOOTSTRAP_GUIDE.md ← Manual bootstrap procedures (one-time)
    ├── scripts/README.md ← Automated bootstrap scripts
    ├── docs/deployment/DEPLOYMENT_GUIDE.md ← Terraform and app deployment
    ├── docs/architecture/VERIFICATION.md ← Post-deployment verification
    └── docs/architecture/ZERO_TRUST_IMPLEMENTATION.md ← Security architecture details
```

### Architecture Documents

- **[ARCHITECTURE.md](./ARCHITECTURE.md)** - All architectural decision records (ADRs)
- **[docs/architecture/BACKEND_FRONTEND_INTEGRATION.md](./docs/architecture/BACKEND_FRONTEND_INTEGRATION.md)** - Integration architecture

---

## Support

- **Documentation Hub:** See [docs/README.md](./docs/README.md) for complete documentation index
- **Documentation Issues:** Create an issue on GitHub
- **Architecture Questions:** See [ARCHITECTURE.md](./ARCHITECTURE.md)
- **Development Questions:** See [CONTRIBUTING.md](./CONTRIBUTING.md)

---

**Last Updated:** January 28, 2026  
**Maintained By:** AssetSim Pro Engineering Team

Commit message:

Add Docker support for Azure SignalR Local Emulator
- Created a Dockerfile for a multi-stage build to set up the Azure SignalR Local Emulator using .NET SDK and ASP.NET Core runtime.
- Added a .dockerignore file to exclude unnecessary files from the Docker context.
- Introduced a settings.json file to configure upstream settings for the emulator.
- Included a telerik-license.txt file for licensing information.

GETTING_STARTED.md, after:

# Getting Started with AssetSim Pro

**Quick Start Guide for New Developers**

This guide provides the essential steps to get AssetSim Pro running locally or deploying to Azure. Follow this path to avoid reading hundreds of pages of documentation upfront.

## 📋 Table of Contents

1. [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
2. [Local Development Setup](#local-development-setup)
3. [Azure Deployment Path](#azure-deployment-path)
4. [Next Steps](#next-steps)
5. [Common Issues](#common-issues)

---

## Prerequisites

Before starting, ensure you have:

### For Local Development

- **Node.js 20.x** or higher
- **Docker & Docker Compose** (for local services)
- **Git**
- **npm** package manager

### For Azure Deployment

All of the above, plus:

- **Azure Subscription** with Contributor or Owner role
- **Azure CLI 2.50.0+** installed and configured
- **Microsoft Entra ID Global Administrator** role (for API consent only)
- **Terraform 1.5.0+** (for infrastructure deployment)

---

## Local Development Setup

For local development without Azure, follow these steps:

### Step 1: Clone and Install Dependencies

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/archubbuck/asset-sim-pro.git
cd asset-sim-pro

# Install dependencies
npm install
```

This automatically sets up Husky git hooks for commit message validation.

### Step 2: Start Local Services

```bash
# Start Docker services (SQL Server, Redis, Azurite, SignalR emulator)
# Note: First run will build the SignalR emulator image (~2-3 minutes)
docker compose up -d

# Verify services are running
docker compose ps
```

**First-Time Build Note:** The SignalR emulator is built locally from Microsoft's official .NET global tool. The first `docker compose up` will take 2-3 minutes to build this image. Subsequent starts will be instant using the cached image.

**Rebuild Scenarios:** You'll need to rebuild the SignalR emulator if:
- You pull changes that update `docker/signalr-emulator/Dockerfile`
- You want to update to a newer emulator version
- Run: `docker compose build signalr-emulator`

**See:** [docker/README.md](./docker/README.md) for detailed build documentation.

### Step 3: Initialize and Seed Database

```bash
# Create database schema
npm run db:init

# Seed with demo data (optional but recommended)
npm run seed:local
```

### Step 4: Configure Local Environment

```bash
# Copy environment template
cp .env.local.example .env.local

# Edit .env.local and set your Kendo UI license key
# KENDO_UI_LICENSE=your-kendo-license-key-here

# Review and adjust connection strings if needed
# (Default values work with Docker Compose setup)
```

**Important: Kendo UI License Configuration**

AssetSim Pro uses Kendo UI for financial charts and components. To run without trial watermarks:

1. Obtain your Kendo UI license key from [https://www.telerik.com/account/](https://www.telerik.com/account/)
2. Open `.env.local` and set `KENDO_UI_LICENSE=your-license-key`
3. Never commit `.env.local` to version control (it's already in `.gitignore`)

If you don't have a license yet, the application will run in trial mode with watermarks.

### Step 5: Start Development Servers

**Option 1: Single Command (Recommended)**

```bash
# Start both frontend and backend with a single command
npm run dev
# or
npm run start:all
```

This uses `concurrently` to run both servers with color-coded output:
- **Frontend (cyan)**: http://localhost:4200
- **Backend (magenta)**: http://localhost:7071/api

**Option 2: Separate Terminals**

```bash
# Terminal 1: Start Angular dev server
npm start

# Terminal 2: Start Azure Functions backend (in a new terminal)
npm run backend:start
```

### ✅ Verify Local Setup

- **Frontend:** http://localhost:4200
- **Backend API:** http://localhost:7071/api
- **API Documentation:** http://localhost:7071/api/docs

**📖 Next:** See [Local Development Guide](./README.md#local-development-environment) for detailed Docker service configuration.

---

## Azure Deployment Path

To deploy AssetSim Pro to Azure, follow this **sequential path**:

### Path Overview

```
1. Bootstrap (One-Time Setup)
   ↓
2. Infrastructure Deployment
   ↓
3. Backend Configuration
   ↓
4. Frontend Deployment
   ↓
5. Verification
```

### Step 1: Bootstrap Azure Resources

**⚠️ REQUIRED BEFORE DEPLOYMENT:** Complete bootstrap operations to set up foundational infrastructure.

#### Configure Secrets

Before deploying, configure the following secrets:

**For GitHub Actions CI/CD:**
1. Go to your GitHub repository → Settings → Secrets and variables → Actions
2. Add a new repository secret:
   - Name: `KENDO_UI_LICENSE`
   - Value: Your Kendo UI license key from https://www.telerik.com/account/

**For Azure DevOps:**
1. In your Azure DevOps project, go to Pipelines → Library
2. Add `KENDO_UI_LICENSE` to the `assetsim-prod-vars` variable group
3. Mark it as secret to protect the value

These secrets are used during the build process to embed the Kendo UI license key without exposing it in source control.

#### Option A: Automated Bootstrap (Recommended)

```bash
# 1. Create Terraform state storage
./scripts/bootstrap-terraform-state.sh

# 2. Grant Entra ID API permissions (requires Global Admin)
export APP_ID="your-application-client-id"
./scripts/bootstrap-entra-consent.sh
```

**📖 See:** [scripts/README.md](./scripts/README.md) for detailed automation documentation.

#### Option B: Manual Bootstrap

Follow the comprehensive manual steps in [BOOTSTRAP_GUIDE.md](./docs/deployment/BOOTSTRAP_GUIDE.md), which covers:

- Phase 1: Terraform State Storage
- Phase 2: Entra ID API Consent
- Phase 3: Azure DevOps Self-Hosted Agent Pool

**📖 See:** [BOOTSTRAP_GUIDE.md](./docs/deployment/BOOTSTRAP_GUIDE.md) for step-by-step manual instructions.

### Step 2: Deploy Infrastructure with Terraform

After bootstrap is complete:

```bash
# Navigate to Terraform directory
cd terraform

# Initialize Terraform with remote state
terraform init \
  -backend-config="resource_group_name=rg-tfstate" \
  -backend-config="storage_account_name=<your-storage-account>" \
  -backend-config="container_name=tfstate"

# Review deployment plan
terraform plan

# Deploy infrastructure
terraform apply
```

**📖 See:** [DEPLOYMENT_GUIDE.md](./docs/deployment/DEPLOYMENT_GUIDE.md) for complete deployment instructions.

### Step 3: Configure Backend

```bash
# Deploy Azure Functions
cd apps/backend
func azure functionapp publish <your-function-app-name>

# Configure application settings (Entra ID, connection strings)
az functionapp config appsettings set \
  --name <your-function-app-name> \
  --resource-group <your-resource-group> \
  --settings @appsettings.json
```

**📖 See:** [DEPLOYMENT_GUIDE.md - Phase 4](./docs/deployment/DEPLOYMENT_GUIDE.md#phase-4-deploy-backend-function-app) for detailed backend configuration.

### Step 4: Deploy Frontend

```bash
# Build and deploy Static Web App
npm run build:prod
swa deploy ./dist/apps/client \
  --deployment-token $DEPLOYMENT_TOKEN
```

**📖 See:** [DEPLOYMENT_GUIDE.md - Phase 5](./docs/deployment/DEPLOYMENT_GUIDE.md#phase-5-configure-static-web-app) for Static Web App setup.

### Step 5: Verify Deployment

Run the verification checklist:

```bash
# Verify infrastructure
terraform output

# Test backend health
curl https://<your-function-app>.azurewebsites.net/api/health

# Test frontend
curl https://<your-static-web-app>.azurestaticapps.net
```

**📖 See:** [VERIFICATION.md](./docs/architecture/VERIFICATION.md) for complete verification steps.

---

## Next Steps

### After Local Setup

- **Explore the codebase:** [NX_WORKSPACE_GUIDE.md](./docs/development/NX_WORKSPACE_GUIDE.md)
- **Understand architecture:** [ARCHITECTURE.md](./ARCHITECTURE.md)
- **Review testing strategy:** [TESTING.md](./docs/development/TESTING.md)
- **Contribution guidelines:** [CONTRIBUTING.md](./CONTRIBUTING.md)

### After Azure Deployment

- **Configure monitoring:** Set up Application Insights
- **Review security:** [ZERO_TRUST_IMPLEMENTATION.md](./docs/architecture/ZERO_TRUST_IMPLEMENTATION.md)
- **Set up CI/CD:** Review [azure-pipelines.yml](./azure-pipelines.yml)

### Understanding the Project

- **Architecture decisions:** [ARCHITECTURE.md](./ARCHITECTURE.md) contains all ADRs
- **Backend-frontend integration:** [BACKEND_FRONTEND_INTEGRATION.md](./docs/architecture/BACKEND_FRONTEND_INTEGRATION.md)

---

## Common Issues

### Issue: "Docker services not starting"

**Solution:**

```bash
# Check Docker is running
docker ps

# View logs for troubleshooting
docker compose logs

# Reset services
docker compose down -v
docker compose up -d
```

### Issue: "Commit message rejected"

**Cause:** This project uses [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/)

**Solution:**

```bash
# Valid format: type(scope): description
git commit -m "feat(backend): add new feature"
git commit -m "fix(frontend): resolve bug"
```

**📖 See:** [CONTRIBUTING.md](./CONTRIBUTING.md) for commit message guidelines.

### Issue: "Azure authentication failed"

**Solution:**

```bash
# Login to Azure
az login

# Set correct subscription
az account set --subscription "<your-subscription-id>"

# Verify login
az account show
```

### Issue: "Terraform backend not found"

**Cause:** Bootstrap not completed

**Solution:** Complete [Step 1: Bootstrap Azure Resources](#step-1-bootstrap-azure-resources) first.

### Issue: "npm install fails"

**Solution:**

```bash
# Clear npm cache
npm cache clean --force

# Delete node_modules and lockfile
rm -rf node_modules package-lock.json

# Reinstall
npm install
```

---

## Document Navigation

This is your **starting point**. Here's how the documentation is organized:

### 📚 Complete Documentation Index

For comprehensive documentation navigation, visit the **[Documentation Hub (`docs/README.md`)](./docs/README.md)**

### Quick Navigation

```
GETTING_STARTED.md (you are here) ← Start here for quick setup
├── docs/README.md ← Complete documentation hub and index
├── README.md ← Project overview and workspace structure
├── Local Development Path
│   ├── docs/development/NX_WORKSPACE_GUIDE.md ← Nx monorepo development
│   ├── docs/development/TESTING.md ← Testing strategy
│   └── CONTRIBUTING.md ← Git workflow and standards
└── Azure Deployment Path
    ├── docs/deployment/BOOTSTRAP_GUIDE.md ← Manual bootstrap procedures (one-time)
    ├── scripts/README.md ← Automated bootstrap scripts
    ├── docs/deployment/DEPLOYMENT_GUIDE.md ← Terraform and app deployment
    ├── docs/architecture/VERIFICATION.md ← Post-deployment verification
    └── docs/architecture/ZERO_TRUST_IMPLEMENTATION.md ← Security architecture details
```

### Architecture Documents

- **[ARCHITECTURE.md](./ARCHITECTURE.md)** - All architectural decision records (ADRs)
- **[docs/architecture/BACKEND_FRONTEND_INTEGRATION.md](./docs/architecture/BACKEND_FRONTEND_INTEGRATION.md)** - Integration architecture

---

## Support

- **Documentation Hub:** See [docs/README.md](./docs/README.md) for complete documentation index
- **Documentation Issues:** Create an issue on GitHub
- **Architecture Questions:** See [ARCHITECTURE.md](./ARCHITECTURE.md)
- **Development Questions:** See [CONTRIBUTING.md](./CONTRIBUTING.md)

---

**Last Updated:** January 28, 2026  
**Maintained By:** AssetSim Pro Engineering Team
